Vikram Chandra
Sacred Games
For
Anuradha Tandon and
S. Hussain Zaidi
Contents
Acknowledgements
Policeman's Day
Siege in Kailashpada
Ganesh Gaitonde Sells His Gold
Going Towards Home
Ganesh Gaitonde Acquires Land
Investigating Women
INSET: A House in a Distant City
Burying the Dead
Ganesh Gaitonde Wins an Election
Old Pain
INSET: The Great Game
Money
Ganesh Gaitonde is Recruited
A Woman in Distress
Ganesh Gaitonde is Recruited Again
Meeting Beauty
Ganesh Gaitonde Explores the Self
Investigating Love
Ganesh Gaitonde Makes a Film
INSET: Five Fragments, Scattered in Time
Ganesh Gaitonde Remakes Himself
The End of the World
Ganesh Gaitonde Goes Home
Safety
INSET: Two Deaths, in Cities Far From Home
Mere Sahiba
Selective Glossary
About the Author
Dramatis Personae
Acknowledgements
Some of the travel for this book was funded by a University Facilitating Fund grant from
George Washington University.
I'm grateful to my erstwhile colleagues at George Washington University for their
support and forbearance, especially my friends in the Creative Writing Program: Faye
Moskowitz; David McAleavey; Jody Bolz; Jane Shore; Maxine Claire.
S. Hussain Zaidi has been extraordinarily generous with his vast knowledge,
warm friendship and unstinting support. I am indebted to him.
Many others offered me aid, information and hospitality during the writing of this
book: Anuradha Tandon; Arup Patnaik, DIG, CBI; API Rajan Gule, CID; Fazal Irani;
Akbar Irani; API Sanjay Rangnekar; Violet Monis; Iqbal Khan; Imtiaz Khan; Nisha
Jamwal; Rajeev Samant; Rakesh Maria, DIG; Viral Mazumdar; Bandana Tewari;
Shernaz Dinshaw; Nonita Kalra; A. D. Singh; Sabina Singh; Rajiv Somani; Aftab Khan;
Rasna Behl; Ashutosh Sohni; Shruti Pandit; Kalpana Mhatre; Deepak Jog, DCP; Srila
Chatterjee; Sherry Zutshi; Namita Waikar; Shashi Tharoor; Julia Eckert; Jaideep and
Seema Mehrotra; Dr Ashok Gupta; Namrata Sharma Zakaria; Dr Amiq Gazdhar;
Farzand Ahmed; Menaka Rao; Gyan Prakash.
In Delhi, Punjab and Jammu and Kashmir: Harinder Baweja; A. K. Sehgal; Amit
Sehgal; Manohar Singh; Agha Shahid Ali; Shafi; Sumit (Surd) Nurpuri; Praveen Swami.
In Bihar: Sanjay Jha; Vinod Mishra; Ravinder Jadav; Ashok Kumar Singh, SP,
Gaya; N. C. Dhoundial, DIG, Gaya; R. K. Prasad, Dy SP, Gaya; Sunit Kumar, IGP,
Patna; Subnath Jha; Bibhuti Nath Jha 'Mastan'; Gopal Dubey; Surendra Trivedi; Sh.
Shaiwal.
* * *
There are others I cannot name. They know who they are.
As always, I'm grateful to my parents, Navin and Kamna, and my sisters, Tanuja
and Anupama; my friend and support, Margo True; Eric Simonoff; Julian Loose; David
Davidar; Terry Karten; and Vidhu Vinod Chopra.
And to Melanie, who changed everything.
The hymns in the chapter 'Ganesh Gaitonde Explores the Self' are from the Rig
Vega. I adapted Raimundo Pannikar's translations (The Vedic Experience, Motilal
Banarsidass, 2001).
Policeman's Day
A white Pomeranian named Fluffy flew out of a fifth-floor window in Panna, which was a
brand-new building with the painter's scaffolding still around it. Fluffy screamed in her
little lap-dog voice all the way down, like a little white kettle losing steam, bounced off
the bonnet of a Cielo, and skidded to a halt near the rank of schoolgirls waiting for the
St Mary's Convent bus. There was remarkably little blood, but the sight of Fluffy's brains
did send the conventeers into hysterics, and meanwhile, above, the man who had
swung Fluffy around his head by one leg, who had slung Fluffy into the void, one Mr
Mahesh Pandey of Mirage Textiles, that man was leaning on his windowsill and
laughing. Mrs Kamala Pandey, who in talking to Fluffy always spoke of herself as
'Mummy', now staggered and ran to her kitchen and plucked from the magnetic holder a
knife nine inches long and two wide. When Sartaj and Katekar broke open the door to
apartment 502, Mrs Pandey was standing in front of the bedroom door, looking
intensely at a dense circle of two-inch-long wounds in the wood, about chest-high. As
Sartaj watched, she sighed, raised her hand and stabbed the door again. She had to
struggle with both hands on the handle to get the knife out.
'Mrs Pandey,' Sartaj said.
She turned to them, the knife still in a double-handed grip, held high. She had a
pale, tear-stained face and tiny bare feet under her white nightie.
'Mrs Pandey, I am Inspector Sartaj Singh,' Sartaj said. 'I'd like you to put down
that knife, please.' He took a step, hands held up and palms forward. 'Please,' he said.
But Mrs Pandey's eyes were wide and blank, and except for the quivering of her
forearms she was quite still. The hallway they were in was narrow, and Sartaj could feel
Katekar behind him, wanting to pass. Sartaj stopped moving. Another step and he
would be comfortably within a swing of the knife.
'Police?' a voice said from behind the bedroom door. 'Police?'
Mrs Pandey started, as if remembering something, and then she said, 'Bastard,
bastard,' and slashed at the door again. She was tired now, and the point bounced off
the wood and raked across it, and Sartaj bent her wrist back and took the knife quite
easily from her. But she smashed at the door with her hands, breaking her bangles, and
her last wiry burst of anger was hard to hold and contain. Finally they sat her down on
the green sofa in the drawing room.
'Shoot him,' she said. 'Shoot him.' Then she put her head in her hands. There
were green and blue bruises on her shoulder. Katekar was back at the bedroom door,
murmuring.
'What did you fight about?' Sartaj said.
'He wants me not to fly any more.'
'What?'
'I'm an air-hostess. He thinks…'
'Yes?'
She had startling light-brown eyes, and she was angry at Sartaj for asking. 'He
thinks since I'm an air hostess, I keep hostessing the pilots on stopovers,' she said, and
turned her face to the window.
Katekar was walking the husband over now, with a hand on his neck. Mr Pandey
hitched up his silky red-and-black striped pyjamas, and smiled confidentially at Sartaj.
'Thank you,' he said. 'Thanks for coming.'
'So you like to hit your wife, Mr Pandey?' Sartaj barked, leaning forward. Katekar
sat the man down, hard, while he still had his mouth open. It was nicely done. Katekar
was a senior constable, an old subordinate, a colleague really – they had worked
together for almost seven years now, off and on. 'You like to hit her, and then you throw
a poor puppy out of a window? And then you call us to save you?'
'She said I hit her?'
'I have eyes. I can see.'
'Then look at this,' Mr Pandey said, his jaw twisting. 'Look, look, look at this.' And
he pulled up his left pyjama jacket sleeve, revealing a shiny silver watch and four evenly
spaced scratches, livid and deep, running from the inside of the wrist around to the
elbow. 'More, I've got more,' Mr Pandey said, and bowed low at the waist and lowered
his head and twisted to raise his collar away from the skin. Sartaj got up and walked
around the coffee table. There was a corrugated red welt on Mr Pandey's shoulder
blade, and Sartaj couldn't see how far down it went.
'What's that from?' Sartaj said.
'She broke a Kashmiri walking stick on my back. This thick, it was,' Mr Pandey
said, holding up his thumb and forefinger circled.
Sartaj walked to the window. There was a group of uniformed boys clustering
around the small white body below, pushing each other closer to it. The St Mary's girls
were squealing, holding their hands to their mouths, and begging the boys to stop. In
the drawing room, Mrs Pandey was gazing brightly at her husband, her chin tucked into
her chest. 'Love,' Sartaj said softly. 'Love is a murdering gaandu. Poor Fluffy.'
* * *
'Namaskar, Sartaj Saab,' PSI Kamble called across the station house. 'Parulkar
Saab was asking after you.' The room was some twenty-five feet across, with four desks
lined up across the breadth of it. There was a six-foot poster of Sai Baba on the wall,
and a Ganesha under the glass on Kamble's desk, and Sartaj had felt impelled to add a
picture of Guru Gobind Singh on the other wall, in a somewhat twisted assertion of
secularism. Five constables came jerkily to attention, and then subsided into their usual
sprawl on white plastic chairs.
'Where is Parulkar Saab?'
'With a pack of reporters. He's giving them tea and telling them about our new
initiative against crime.'
Parulkar was the deputy commissioner for Zone 13, and his office was next door,
in a separate building that was the zonal headquarters. He loved reporters, and had a
genius for being jovial with them, and a recent knack for declaiming couplets during
interviews. Sartaj wondered sometimes if he sat up late with books of poetry, practising
in front of a mirror. 'Good,' Sartaj said. 'Somebody has to tell them about all our hard
work.'
Kamble let out a snort of laughter.
Sartaj sat at the desk next to Kamble and flipped open a copy of the Indian
Express. Two members of the Gaitonde gang had been shot to death in an encounter
with the Flying Squad in Bhayander. The police had acted on received intelligence and
intercepted the two as they proceeded to a factory office in that locality; the two
extortionists had been hailed and told to surrender, but they had instantly fired at the
squad, who then retaliated, et cetera, et cetera. There was a colour photograph of plainclothes
men bending over two oblong red stains on the ground. In other news, there had
been two break-ins in Andheri East, one in Worli, and this last one had ended in the
fatal stabbing of a young couple. As Sartaj read, he could hear the elderly man sitting
across from Kamble talking about slow death. His eighty-year-old mausi had fallen
down a flight of stairs and broken her hip. They had checked her into the Shivsagar
Polyclinic, where she had borne with her usual stoicism the unrelenting pain in her old
bones. After all, she had marched with Gandhi-ji in forty-two and had suffered her first
fracture then – of the collarbone from a mounted policeman's lathi – and also the bare
floors of jail cells afterwards. She had an old-fashioned strength, which saw sacrifice of
the self as one's duty in the world. But when the pressure ulcers flowered their deep red
wounds on her arms and shoulders and back, even she had said, perhaps it is time for
me to die. The elderly man had never heard her say anything of the like, but now she
groaned, I want to die. And it took her twenty-two days to find relief, twenty-two days
before blessed darkness. If you had seen her, the elderly man said, you too would have
cried.
Kamble was flipping pages in a register. Sartaj completely believed the elderly
man's story, and understood his problem: the Shivsagar Polyclinic wouldn't let him take
the body without a No Objection Certificate endorsed by the police. The handwritten
note on Brihanmumbai Municipal Corporation stationery would say that the police were
satisfied that the death in question was natural, that there was no foul play involved, that
the body could be released to relatives for disposal. This was supposed to prevent
murders – dowry killings and suchlike – from being passed off as accidents, and Police
Sub Inspector Kamble was supposed to sign it on behalf of the ever watchful, khaki-clad
guardians of Mumbai, but he had it sitting next to his elbow and he was studiously
scribbling in his register. The elderly man had his hands folded together, and his white
hair fell over his forehead, and he was looking at the indifferent Kamble with moist eyes.
'Please, sir,' he said.
Sartaj thought it was on the whole a finely considered performance, and that the
grief was genuine, but the bit about Gandhi-ji and broken collarbones quite excessively
and melodramatically reproving. Both the elderly man and Kamble knew well that a
payment would have to be made before the certificate was signed. Kamble would
probably hold out for eight hundred rupees; the old man wanted to give only five
hundred or so, but the sacrifices of the elders had been done to death in the movies,
and Kamble was quite indifferent to the degeneration-of-India gambit. He now closed
his red register and reached for a green one. He studied it closely. The old man began
the whole story again, from the fall down the stairs. Sartaj got up, stretched, and walked
out into the courtyard of the station. In the shade of the gallery that ran along the front of
the building, and under the tin portico, there was the usual crowd of touts, hangers-on,
relatives of those chained in the detection room inside, messengers and representatives
from local businessmen, favour-seekers, and, here and there, those marked by
misfortune and sudden misery, now looking up at him in mingled hope and bitterness.
Sartaj walked past them all. There was an eight-foot wall around the whole
complex, of the same reddish-brown brick as the station house and the zonal
headquarters. Both buildings were two storeys high, with identical red-tiled roofs and
oval-topped windows. There was a promise in the grim arches, in the thickness of the
walls and the uncompromising weight of the façades, there was the reassurance of
bulky power, and so law and order. A sentry snapped to attention as Sartaj went up the
stairs. Sartaj heard the laughter from Parulkar's cabin well before he could see it, while
he was still twisting through the warren of cubicles piled high with paper. Sartaj knocked
sharply on the lustrous wood of Parulkar's door, then pushed it open. There was a quick
upturning of laughing faces, and Sartaj saw that even the national newspapers had
come out for the story of Parulkar's initiative, or at least for his poetry. He was good
copy.
'Gentlemen, gentlemen,' Parulkar said, raising one proud, pointing hand. 'My
most daring officer, Sartaj Singh.' The correspondents lowered their teacups with a long
clatter and looked at Sartaj sceptically. Parulkar walked around the desk, tugging at his
belt. 'One minute, please. I'll talk to him outside for a moment, then he will tell you about
our initiative.'
Parulkar shut the door, and led Sartaj around the back of the cabin, to a very
small kitchen which now boasted a gleaming new Brittex water filter on its wall. Parulkar
pressed buttons and a bright stream of water fell into the glass he held below.
'It tastes very pure, sir,' Sartaj said. 'Very good indeed.'
Parulkar was drinking deep draughts from a steel tumbler. 'I asked them for their
best model,' he said. 'Because clean water is absolutely necessary.'
'Yes, sir.' Sartaj took a sip. 'Sir – "daring"?'
'They like daring. And you had better be daring if you want to stay in this job.'
Parulkar had sloping shoulders and a pear-shaped body that defeated the best
tailors, and his uniform was crumpled already, but that was only usual. There was a sag
in his voice, a resignation in his sideways glance that Sartaj had never known. 'Is
something wrong, sir? Is there some complication with the initiative, sir?'
'No, no, no complication with the initiative. No, nothing to do with that at all. It is
something else.'
'Yes, sir?'
'They are after me.'
'Who, sir?'
'Who else?' Parulkar said with unusual asperity. 'The government. They want me
out. They think I've gone high enough.'
Parulkar was now a deputy commissioner of police, and he had once been a
lowly sub-inspector. He had risen through the Maharashtra State Police, and he had
made that near-impossible leap into the august Indian Police Service, and he had done
it alone, with good police work, a sense of humour, and very long hours. It had been an
astonishing and unparalleled career, and he had risen to become Sartaj's mentor. He
emptied his glass, and poured more water from his new Brittex filter.
'Why, sir?' Sartaj said. 'Why?'
'I was too close to the previous government. They think I'm a Congress man.'
'So they may want you out. That doesn't mean anything. You have lots of years
left before retirement.'
'You remember Dharmesh Mathija?'
'Yes, that's the fellow who built our wall.' Mathija was a builder, one of the more
conspicuously successful ones in the northern suburbs, a man whose ambition showed
like a sweaty fever on his forehead. He had built, in record time, the extension of the
compound wall at the rear of the station, around the recently filled lowland. There was
now a Hanuman temple and a small lawn and young trees that you could see from the
offices to the rear of the building. Parulkar's passion was improvement. He said it often:
we must improve. Mathija and Sons had improved the station, and of course they had
done it for free. 'So what about Mathija, sir?'
Parulkar was taking little sips of water, swirling it about in his mouth. 'I was called
to the DG's office yesterday, early.'
'Yes, sir.'
'The DG had a call from the home minister. Mathija has threatened to file a case.
He said he was forced to do some work for me. Construction.'
'That's absurd, sir. He came himself. How many times he visited you here. We all
saw that. He was happy to do it.'
'Not our wall here. At my home.'
'At your home?'
'The roof needed work urgently. As you know, it's a very old house. My ancestral
abode really. Also, it needed a new bathroom. Mamta and my granddaughters have
moved back home. As you know. So.'
'And?'
'Mathija did it. He did good work. But now he says he has me on tape threatening
him.'
'Sir?'
'I remember phoning him to tell him to hurry up. Finish the work before the last
monsoons. I may have used some strong language.'
'But so what, sir? Let him go to court. Let him do what he wants. Let him see
what we do to his life here, sir. At his sites, all his offices…'
'Sartaj, that's just their excuse. It's a way to put pressure on me, and let me know
I am not wanted. They're not satisfied with just transferring me, they want to get rid of
me.'
'You will fight back, sir.'
'Yes.' Parulkar was the best player of the political game Sartaj had ever known:
he was a grandmaster of the subtle art of contact and double-contact and back-channel,
of ministers and corporators cultivated and kept happy, business interests allowed room
for profits, backslapping and exchanges with commissioners of police, favours finely
weighed and dispensed and remembered, deals made and forgotten – he was an
aficionado of the subtle sport, he was simply the best. It was incredible that he was so
tired. His collar sagged, and the swell of his belly was no longer jaunty, only weighted
by regret. He drank another glass of water, fast. 'You had better get in there, Sartaj.
They're waiting for you.'
'I'm sorry, sir.'
'I know you are.'
'Sir.' Sartaj thought he should say something else, something full of gratitude and
somehow conclusive about what Parulkar had meant to him – the years together, the
cases solved and the ones left and abandoned, the manoeuvres learnt, how to live and
work and survive as a policeman in the city – and yet Sartaj was able only to come to
rigid attention. Parulkar nodded. Sartaj was certain he understood.
Outside the cabin, Sartaj checked the tuck of his shirt, ran a hand over his
turban. Then he stepped in, and told the reporters about more policemen on more
streets, about community interaction, about strict supervision and transparency, about
how things were going to get better.
* * *
For lunch Sartaj had an uttapam sent to the station from the next-door Udipi
Restaurant. The keen kick of the chillies was invigorating, but when he was finished,
Sartaj was unable to get up from his chair. It had been a very light meal but he was
crushed, pulped by lassitude. He was barely able to get up and pull the bench from the
wall, to slip off his shoes and lie flat and very straight on the wood. His arms were
crossed on his chest. A deep breath, then another, and the edge cutting into the back of
his thigh receded, and in the swimming drowsiness he was able to forget details, and
the world became a receding white blur. Yet a sharp undertow flung him into anger, and
after a moment he was able to remember what he was restless about. All of Parulkar's
triumphs were going to be wiped away, made meaningless by an engineered disgrace.
And once Parulkar was gone, what of Sartaj? What would become of him? Sartaj had
begun recently to feel that he himself had accomplished nothing in his life. He was past
forty, a divorced police inspector with middling professional prospects. Others from his
batch had climbed past him, he was just pedalling along, doing his job. He looked into
his future and saw that he would not achieve as much as his own father, and much less
than the redoubtable Parulkar. I am quite useless, Sartaj thought, and felt very bleak.
He sat up, rubbed his face, shook his head violently, and pulled on his shoes. He
stalked into the front room, where PSI Kamble was rubbing his stomach lightly in circles.
He looked quite satisfied.
'Good lunch?' Sartaj said.
'Absolute top first-class biryani from that new Laziz Restaurant on S. T. Road,'
Kamble said. 'In a fancy clay pot, you know. We're getting very pish-posh in
Kailashpada.' Kamble straightened up and leaned closer. 'Listen. You know those two
gaandus who were encountered yesterday by the Flying Squad in Bhayander?'
'Gaitonde gang, yes?'
'Right. You know the Gaitonde gang and the Suleiman Isa gang have been
stepping up their war again, right? So, I heard the two hits yesterday were a supari
given by the S-Company. I heard that the Flying Squad boys made twenty lakhs.'
'You'd better get in the squad then.'
'Boss, what do you think I'm saving up for? I hear the going rate to get in is
twenty-five lakhs.'
'Very expensive.'
'Very,' Kamble said. His face was aglow, every pore open and alight. 'But money
makes it all happen, my friend, and to make money you have to spend money.'
Sartaj nodded, and Kamble sank into a register again. Sartaj had once heard it
from a slumlord convicted of murder, the bitter secret of life in the metropolis: paisa
phek, tamasha dekh. They had literally bumped into each other, walking round a corner
in a basti in Andheri. They had recognized each other instantly, despite Sartaj's plain
clothes and the slumlord's new paunch. Sartaj said, arre, Bahzad Hussain, aren't you
supposed to be serving fifteen years for offing Anwar Yeda? And Bahzad Hussain
laughed nervously, and said, Inspector saab, you know how it is, I got parole and now it
says in my file that I'm absconding in Bahrain, paisa phek, tamasha dekh. Which was
absolutely true: if you had money to throw, you could watch the spectacle – the judges
and magistrates trapezing blithely, the hoop-jumping politicians, the happy, red-nosed
cops. Bahzad Hussain had the grace and good sense to come quietly to the station, and
he was very confident, and wanted only a cup of tea and a chance to make a few phone
calls. He made jokes and laughed a lot. Yes, he had thrown his money and watched the
spectacle. All of this police jhanjhat was only a slight waste of time, nothing more. Paisa
phek, tamasha dekh.
Kamble now had a family standing in front of him, a mother and a father and a
son in blue-uniform short pants. The father was a tailor who had come back home from
the shop early in the afternoon, to get some suiting material he had forgotten. On the
way he had taken a short-cut and seen his son, who was supposed to be in school,
playing marbles against the factory wall with some faltu street kids. The mother was
doing the talking now. 'Saab, I beat him, his father shouts at him, nothing helps. The
teachers have given up. He shouts back at us, my son. He thinks he's too smart. He
thinks he doesn't need school. I'm tired of it, saab. You take him. You put him in jail.'
She made the motion of emptying her hands, and dabbed at her eyes with the end of
her blue pallu. Looking at her hands and finely muscled forearms, Sartaj was certain
that she worked as a bai, that she washed dishes and clothes for the wives of
executives in the Shiva Housing Colony. The son had his head down, and was scraping
the side of one shoe against the other.
Sartaj crooked a finger. 'Come here.' The boy shuffled sideways. 'What's your
name?'
'Sailesh.' He was about thirteen, quite wise, with a stylish floppy hairdo and
flashing black eyes.
'Hello, Sailesh.'
'Hello.'
Sartaj smashed a hand down on to the table. It was very loud, and Sailesh
started and backed away. Sartaj grabbed him by the collar and twisted him around the
end of the desk. 'You think you're tough, Sailesh? You're so tough you're not scared of
anyone, Sailesh? Let me show you what we do with tough taporis like you, Sailesh.'
Sartaj walked him around the room and through a door and into the detection room,
lifting him off the floor with every stride. Katekar was sitting with another constable at
the end of the room, near the squatting line of chained prisoners.
'Katekar,' Sartaj called.
'Sir.'
'Which is the toughest of this lot?'
'This one, sir, thinks he's hard. Narain Swami, pickpocket.'
Sartaj shook Sailesh so that his head wobbled and snapped. 'This big man here
thinks he's harder than all of us. Let him see. Give Narain Swami some dum and let the
big man see.'
Katekar lifted the cringing Narain Swami and bent him over, and Swami struggled
and jingled his chains, but when the first open-palmed blow landed on his back with an
awful popping noise he got the idea. With the second one he howled quite creditably.
After the third and fourth he was sobbing. 'Please, please, saab. No more.' After the
sixth, Sailesh was weeping fat tears. He turned his face away and Sartaj forced his chin
around.
'Want to see more, Sailesh? You know what we do next?' Sartaj pointed at the
thick white bar that ran from one wall to the other, close to the ceiling. 'We put Swami on
the ghodi. We string him up on the bar, hands and feet, and give it to him with the patta.
Show him the patta, Katekar.'
But Sailesh, looking at the thick length of the strap, whispered, 'No, don't.'
'What?'
'Please don't.'
'You want to end up here, Sailesh? Like Narain Swami?'
'No.'
'What's that?'
'No, saab. Please.'
'You will, you know. If you keep going like you are.'
'I won't, saab. I won't.'
Sartaj turned him around, both hands on his shoulders, and walked him towards
the door. Narain Swami was still bent over, and flashing an upside-down grin. Outside,
sitting on a metal chair with a Coke bottle clutched between his knees, Sailesh listened
quietly to Sartaj. He sipped his Coke and Sartaj told him how people like Narain Swami
ended up, beaten up, used up, addicted, in jail and out of it, wasted and tired and finally
dead. All of it from not going to school and disobeying his mother.
'I'll go,' Sailesh said.
'Promise?'
'Promise,' Sailesh said and touched his throat.
'Better keep it,' Sartaj said. 'I hate people who break promises. I'll come after
you.'
Sailesh nodded, and Sartaj led him out. At the station gate, the mother hung
back. She came close to Sartaj and held up her fisted hands and opened them. In the
right there was the twisted end of her pallu, and in the left a neatly folded hundred rupee
note. 'Saab,' she said.
'No,' Sartaj said. 'No.'
She had oiled hair and reddened eyes. She smiled, barely, and held up her
hands higher, and opened them further.
'No,' Sartaj said. He turned and walked away.
* * *
Katekar drove with an easy grace that found the gaps in the traffic with balletic
timing. Sartaj pushed his seat back and drowsily watched him change gears and snake
the Gypsy between trucks and autos with less than inches to spare. Sartaj had long ago
learned to relax. He still anticipated a crash every few minutes, but he had learned from
Katekar not to care. It was all confidence. You went forward, and someone always
backed off at the last moment, and it was always the other gaandu. Katekar scratched
at his crotch, growled 'Eh, bhenchod,' and stared down a double-decker driver, forced
him to an absolute stop. They took a left, and Sartaj grinned at the wide swagger of the
turn. 'Tell me, Katekar,' Sartaj said, 'who is your favourite hero?'
'Film hero?'
'What else?'
Katekar was embarrassed. 'When I do watch movies –' He jiggled the gear stick,
and wiped a spot of dust from the windscreen. 'When there is some film on television,' –
which was only all the time – 'I like to watch Dev Anand.'
'Dev Anand? Really?'
'Yes, sir.'
'But he's my favourite also.' Sartaj liked the old black-and-white ones where Dev
Anand listed across the screen at an impossible angle, unbelievably dashing and
sublimely suave. In his limp perfection there was an odd comfort, a nostalgia for a
simplicity that Sartaj had never known. But he had expected Katekar to be an Amitabh
Bachchan extremist, or an enthusiast of the muscle boys, Sunil Shetty or Akshay
Kumar, who stood huge on the posters like some new gigantic and bulging species.
'Which Dev Anand film do you like best, Katekar?'
Katekar smiled, and tipped his head to the side. It was a perfect Dev Anand
waggle. 'Why, sir, Guide, sir. Of course.'
Sartaj nodded. 'Of course.' Guide was in bright sixties colour, all the better to
savour the intense and ecstatic love that Dev found for Waheeda, and the bitterness of
his final tragedy. Sartaj had always found the long-drawn-out death of the guide almost
unbearable to watch, all his loneliness and his withered love. But here was Katekar with
his unexpected Dev-sympathies. Sartaj laughed, and sang, 'Gata rahe mera dil…'
Katekar bobbed his head, and when Sartaj forgot the lyrics after 'Tu hi meri manzil,' he
sang the next couplet, all the way until the antra. Now they were grinning at each other.
'They don't make movies like that any more,' Sartaj said.
'No, they don't, sir,' Katekar said. They had a clear stretch of road now, all the
way up to the intersection at Karanth Chowk. They sped past clusters of apartment
buildings to the right, ensconced behind a long grey wall, and on the left the untidy
shacks of a basti opened doors directly on to the road. Katekar stopped at the light
smoothly, coming from headlong velocity to an even halt.
'There are rumours about Parulkar Saab,' he said, wiping the inside of the
steering wheel with his forefinger.
'What kind of rumours?'
'That he's ill, and is thinking of leaving the force.'
'What's his illness?'
'Heart.'
This was a good rumour, Sartaj thought, as rumours went. It might have been
Parulkar himself who'd started this one, working from the basic operational principle that
a secret was impossible to keep, that everybody would know something soon, and that
it was better you should shape the wild theorizing that would take place, steer it and find
advantage in it. 'I don't know about him leaving,' Sartaj said, 'but he is considering his
options.'
'For his heart?'
'Something like that.'
Katekar nodded. He didn't seem too concerned. Sartaj knew that Katekar wasn't
a great fan of Parulkar Saab, although he would never speak badly of him in front of
Sartaj. He had said once, though